It's a very gross thing.
You have to come to that subtler plane,
otherwise you miss it. And some people can
never get it. That's it.
Because it is such a subtle thing,
very subtle. You can say that supposing we
have a cold, then we cannot get the
fragrance. Only with cold we cannot get
the fragrance. Supposing we have no eyes,
we can't see. Even they exist,
we cannot see. Leave alone and enjoy.
At least you should be able to see.
You cannot see it. So these things have
grown into us as human beings,
that we see beauty, we see aesthetics,
and we get fragrance, and we see
cleanliness. All these things we
appreciate, while animals don't.
So we have become, we think we have become
very subtle, but we have not.
Since we are gross.
You see, unless and until you go to the
sukshma, it is the sukshma.
This is the, what you call,
the subtle thing. And for that,
one has to be very subtle,
you see, your attention has to be very
subtle. Like you can say a needle is
there, and if you have to put the thread
into it, you see, it's a very subtle job.
And the needle has to have a big hole,
first of all, which seldomly I find.
That the space is so little,
you see, there's very little space between
two thoughts. Like a thought rises and
falls off, you see. And there are many
thoughts around it, bombarded from ego,
superego and all that. And you are faced
with that immediately. So this attention
goes from here to this thought,
that thought, like that you start moving.
And this is in between, here,
down below you have to touch it.
This is a very subtle thing.
So what happens, you have to slow down.
And slow down to that limit that you stay
there. Moreover, this gap has to be
bigger. When you have to put the needle
into the thread, you have to slow down.
You have to make the needle correct,
in the sense it should be put in a correct
way. And the thread is to be nicely,
you see, put right. And it is subtle.
But those who have never done it,
cannot do it. It is the depthness also one
has to develop. It is the depthness one
has to develop.
Now with Sahaja Yoga, it is something so
wonderful, which I do not know if you have
noticed or not. It's such a wonderful
thing, that you have had no craving as
such a Kundalini like. You have developed
no depthness about it. You have had no
sort of experience of the sukshma before
it. But as soon as you get it,
the whole thing comes to you in a parcel.
You can raise the kundalini,
you can give them realization,
you can feel the collective consciousness.
Immediately you start feeling.
But the gross part is around.
So one has to be very careful.
Now a person who is sort of possessed,
for such a person he is even more
difficult. Because, you see,
when he is possessed, all his gaps are
already filled in, with the possession.
So he can never find that subtle thing,
because he has a barrier already around
him. First of all he should be free.
All the possessions have to go away.
But, you see, by so many things we are
possessed. We are so much possessed by
ideas, which we think are very great,
you see. Something, like some people think
that money is something great,
or some power is very great.
And sometimes we find them so hopelessly
gross. And they talk of very gross things.
I mean, so mundane and so gross,
that you don't know what to do with your
Sahaja Yoga. I mean, you don't know how to
put the needle, you see,
because all the needles don't have whole
eye, because they are filled with lot of
mud, which is to be cleansed,
and cleaned and put away.
While cleaning something naturally it
hurts. That's why the people get hurt.
The reason why in Sahaja Yoga,
I've seen, always it happens.
Lots of people will come in the beginning.
Then gradually they go on reducing.
Because it hurts them. You see,
first getting Realization is all right.
But then it comes back to the cleaning
part. In that cleaning you have to do the
cleaning. Then you hurt yourself.
It is very difficult to clean yourself
something, because others are doing well
and good. But you are not under the
masses. You are quite aware.
And you have to do cleaning also.
So for that you have to do little bit of
exercise in the sense that you have to sit
before the photograph, cleanse yourself,
little bit of listen also.
Now listening is, you know that I'm not
like other gurus, that I give you left and
right, sort of orders like that.
Nor do I go to a large extent in imposing
anything. I give you your freedom
and your wisdom to decide.
But still, you have to see My mood very
important, you see, because this mood is
not rational or I have not brought it
deliberately. It comes to Me because it
means something.
So I'll give an example.
A Gregor's uncle was coming here.
He asked Me first, Mother,
should I have him for the ashram?
Now I was swinging little bit here
and there, you see. But he didn't
understand that I was trying to sort of
pass it over. Then he said,
there is no hotel available.
Because the fellow said,
I'm coming in a week. I'm coming four days
earlier. Now this is all satanic.
This is all satanic force that is building
up. They know ashram is here.
So make him go four days earlier,
give ideas. So he comes here four days
earlier. Now you being a good man,
you think that how can you say no to him?
But at this time you should say that,
you see, you are coming here but I,
this ashram, I'm just staying here myself.
And so I can, nobody can come
and stay here till they are sahaja yogis.
And we cannot have you around,
we are sorry. But you can wait
and I'll find out some place for you.
But I cannot have things according to your
program. And when you say this,
then immediately even the possession will
leave that person. Because he is just
there to spoil our work here.
And that's how many a times it has
happened. One David came
and you were all having some assaults
and you were all going round
and round and round. But that,
it so happened that, you see,
it was just brought to me that it should
be so and he should be there
and all these things. So I didn't know
what to do, you see. Of course I can play
little tricks so that they are not there.
So I played a trick on him
and he went away.
But to begin with only, don't try to bring
things to your problems,
you see. Already you are here like a
hospital, are getting yourself treated.
So don't have horrible people by which you
get more wounded. This is what I am trying
to tell you. But sometimes you know people
feel hurt, they don't like it.
Small things small thing they feel hurt
with the problem, you see.
And it's very difficult to explain to
people, to understand. There is nothing to
get angry. After all, this is a very
subtle thing. You are working out
something subtle and there should be no
more disturbance. Because again the gross
disturbance is coming. Then again you have
to fight it. What's the use?
You see, it is like a complete penance,
a tapasya as they call it.
It's a penance. So that you have to
dedicate your complete attention to it
and you have to be in the subtle condition
and you must then establish yourself
fully.
Once you have fully established,
then you'll be amazed that no badha will
touch you. On the contrary,
wherever you'll walk, the badhas will be
going away. In Rahuri we have three very
strong people, only three of them.
And they go on a motorbike in the night
somewhere or something. They go at about
twelve o'clock, they go any time they feel
like. So some of the spirits,
you see, came in the dreams of some of the
people and told them that,
tell them to go at least one by one,
not three of them together,
otherwise we'll be completely finished.
See, they came and told like this.
And then people came and told them that,
please, you know, they came
and told us something in the dreams that
you go with three of them together,
otherwise they'll be all finished.
So many things happen like that,
you see.
So when you become very subtle person,
if you carry a little of,
say, my kumkum in your finger or
something, and they understand you so
well. Some people went some place in a
village and so some people came
and they said, they were all sort of
spiritualist type. They said,
let's see now what is your Sahaja Yoga,
let's see this challenge.
They said, let us see how we work it out,
your Sahaja Yoga. So they said,
all right, you sit down.
And they said, try to cure this man or
something. So they put the hand on that
person. So he said, what is this?
You, it is Mataji curing me or you are
curing? Again he would feel their hands,
open his eyes. He said, how?
He said, I can hear them.
And I can feel it. And you are wearing her
kada (metal bracelet ideally) in the hand
and you are doing in her name,
is it? Like that you will talk to them.
And they have recorded all this.
So this kind of thing can happen.
You see, they talk. These negative people,
they talk and they tell you.
And they talk quite, I mean,
it is quite audible. People can record it
now that maybe was saying,
I have recorded it. It's very easy to
record all these voices.
Sometimes these voices come through human
beings or sometimes from the air you can
hear such voices coming and all kinds of
things they say.
But to be subtle, you see,
is to be in the present.
In the past, if you go, or in the future,
if you go, then you cannot be subtle.
Subtle means to be in the present.
So that is the way you are going to be in
the subtle part of yourself.
If you think about the future or the past,
then it is not the subtle position.
To subtle yourself, to make your subtler
and subtler, you should be in the present.
Now as I told you about the needle,
now the needle is like that,
straight. And the hand is going like this.
Now if the needle is here or here,
then it can't go. So the Kundalini has to
pass through the chakras.
The chakras should be absolutely placed in
the centre. They should not be this side
pulled or that side. If they are,
then the Kundalini doesn't know how to get
in. And then that's how you get pain in
your chakras or the Kundalini goes
and sort of bangs, you see,
at the closed side. And that's how you see
the whole thing, pulsation and is going.
Then the Kundalini spreads on all the
sides. You see it moving on this side
and making some, sort of a pulsation
there. You see all those movements and all
that. So to be subtle means to be in the
present. Just to come in the present,
neither in the past nor post.
And when you are there, you'll be amazed
that Kundalini will be straight up like
that. Just like this straight up.
But people are in the present for a very
short time. Because as I told you,
the present is just a little bit.
But if you can increase the space,
then it can be.
Now for this increase of the space,
you must meditate. If you do not meditate,
this space will remain like this.
And at the slightest pretext,
you'll be catching. At the slightest
pretext, you'll be in trouble.
So meditation is the way you can do it.
Now what is meditation? How to do it?
It's first to sit down and watch your
thoughts to begin with. When you watch
your thoughts, you'll find there are still
thoughts coming and thoughts coming.
Then you can ask your mind,
now let me see what are you thinking.
Still the mind is thinking.
You can do one more thing.
It's to breathe in and breathe out.
Thrice you can do that. Deep breathing and
breathing out. After that,
you do three breathings in which you try
to bring breathing to a very low degree.
In the third one, I mean this is the first
phase, then the second. In the third one
you breathe in such a manner that
breathing becomes absolutely equal to
zero. You'll be amazed with this kind of a
breathing thing. What happens with the
breathing? The thoughts,
you see, move with that.
But when you bring it to the zero,
it means you are in the present.
So that is how also you work out.
But this is a sort of a,
we can say, an exercise.
But this is only possible after
realization because after realization your
kundalini is activated and it has a
meaning. But if you do before realization,
it will be going wrong. Before
realization, if you do any one of these
things, you will be absolutely on the
other side. It is something so funny.
But it happens even in practical life that
if you try to do something,
like you want to start a car
and there's no key on and you go on
jamming it, the car will never start.
On the contrary, the car will be spoilt.
But when the car is opened up,
then if you put the brakes
or you raise the accelerator,
you can do it. But when car is not started
and then you start doing it,
the car will be spoiled.
There will be no movement.
On the contrary, the car will move
backwards at the most. It will never move
forward. It will not be in your control.
And this is what is tantrism.
This is what tantrism is,
and the tantrikas, which is so called the
usage of tantrism; actually tantrikas are
really sahaja yogis because they know how
to use the tantra that is Kundalini.
But these (false tantrikas) are the
horrible people who are not realized
and they are trying to play with it.
And by doing that, what they are doing,
are creating a sort of a barrier after
barrier by which they are spoiling the
tantra and they are going in the other
direction. And the movement in the
backward direction, they call it as a
movement in the upward direction.
So it's just in opposition of real tantra,
you see.
All the spiritual world should be under
this. All the spiritual healers
and all kinds of spiritual healers must be
brought under this category.
Though here they are called as spiritual
healers, but tantrikas, because they have
gone against the tantra by which they have
spoiled the tantra. They have spoiled the
tantra and by spoiling it,
whatever comes out of it,
they think this is something like a fruit,
you see. Now you can putrefy a fruit.
If you putrefy the fruit,
it can become into a wine.
Then you say, oh, this is a wonderful
thing. It is like that. This is the
putrefaction of your being,
which gives you these odors
and things and that you start thinking,
oh, this is wine, very good.
And so, in the beginning,
you know, no one likes these things.
For example, whiskey, people say,
is very difficult to take in the
beginning. But gradually it so works out,
gradually, that you develop a taste for
it. You can start developing a taste for
anything. If you work it you can.
So this is what happens,
is in a subtle thing it can become
absolutely gross. The whole thing is
ruined and absolutely finished.
So because of these possessions,
all these gurus are nothing but tantrikas.
All of them are tantrikas.
Nothing but tantrikas. They are within
spirits. Now how do they get into spirits?
How do they master the spirits?
How are they there? Like,
as I was saying, let us take the analogy
of the car. Car has to go forward,
upward on a thing. All right?
You have come all the way upto human
stage. Now, the car has not yet started.
You cannot control the car.
You cannot raise it higher.
So it goes on. What do you do?
If you leave the brake, it goes on.
You put the accelerator,
doesn't work out. If you put the
accelerator, it may accelerate,
you are going down. So you go down.
This movement starts. Now you go into any
khat, you don't know which side you will
fall. You see, they fall into this side
and that side. First they get hurt,
again they get into the car.
Again they start, again they go this side,
that side, God knows whether they go to
the left or to the right.
Sometimes they also get into a mixed
condition. So whichever way,
wherever they go, whatever side they fall,
they meet all these horrible people.
They say, oh, doesn't matter.
You see, we look after you,
we will help you. And they put them down,
and more and more. And we will give you
powers. Now what are the powers of
quality? These are the powers how to fall
fast. And there is no parachuting,
but it's really falling down.
And they have no idea as to how you fall
down. They just fall as,
just like somebody is thrown from a place,
just like that. But they think it is a
force (power). They do not understand the
ascent. They think this is a force
(power). And they call it as Kundalini
awakening. What do you say to such people.
And that's how the whole set of Kundalini,
is spoilt. The complete concept is spoilt
to such an extent that they have spoilt
all our scriptures, they have spoilt
everything. Because these people became,
you see, a great conscience keeper of all
the horrible things we have.
So they used to give them a very good
support for their fall, you see.
And they confused God with this fall.
This confusion was done by tantrika.
And this is why, yesterday I was talking
to Gregor and there, and you see,
someone gave an idea that,
you see, first the God was separated,
and sex was separated. It was not
confused, even in England and all that.
But then these gurus came in,
and these tantrikas came in,
and these things came in,
and then they gave the idea.
But I say Freud also. Freud is another
great tantrika. These are another horrible
thing. So they gave these ideas.
With these ideas all the subtle was
covered, and man became absolutely,
what you call, the lame thing of these
tantrikas. And there are ways
and means how they work it out.
So to come to Sahaja Yoga,
one has to know that you have to be very,
very sort of surrendering about it.
Because if you come to Sahaja Yoga,
you say, all right, I will see about it.
If it works, I'll accept it.
Sahaja Yoga is not going to fall at your
feet. You have to accept,
because this is a subtle thing.
You see, something gross,
it's very easy to pick up.
But this is subtle, so you have to seek
the subtle. Like a needle would say,
a needle and thread is there.
And if somebody says, I will see if the
needle gets the thread in,
I will go to it, otherwise I won't.
No. That is not possible.
You see, whatever you may say,
it cannot be done. Like other gurus are
doing, I cannot do it. You have to cleanse
your holes and you have to put the thing
properly, with proper concentration and
surrender. Otherwise it will not work.
So this is why in Sahaja Yoga the
surrendering is not the way the other
gurus want of money or sort of bending
before them and all that.
That is not the thing that is wanted.
From the heart you must know that you have
to come to a point where you are in the
present. So you cut out your ego,
you cut out your superego
and you be in the present.
This is what is surrendering
and this is wisdom.
If you just say that, why not Mataji
should give us an instant thing.
I mean, you cannot demand anything from
Me. You cannot. I mean, this is not your
right, demand. But, I mean,
I am working it out, I am trying,
my hard. But you have to come to one point
that this is very subtle stuff,
extremely subtle. And even the slightest
thing can spoil it. That's why there is a
protocol about it. You see,
everything is to be weighed very carefully
and see. And gradually the things start
flowering and then you find beautiful
flowers. But in the beginning it's a very
big dynamic change, very dynamic method by
which the whole thing works out
and very delicate too. So keeping all the
delicacies and everything intact is only
possible if you try to keep in the
present. And forget what has happened in
the past and forget what you are going to
have in the future. Actually still the
past is lingering on your minds.
It makes your heart and chakra very weak.
Your all left side is very weak in that.
Now if you think of the future,
then your right side is very weak.
Now what am I to do? I want you to be in
the center. And once you are in the center
you will achieve both of them.
You can achieve both the things very well
because the wisdom balances all that.
So that you will be able to balance your
heart and your being. Absolutely.
A complete integration takes place.
So everything comes out and you never lose
and you feel very happy about it.
And it can be remarkable.
So it's a very subtle thing
and should not be disturbing to anyone if
somebody you find is gross.
He is gross, all right. She is gross,
all right. We are not there.
We are here at the end. At the most we can
tell her that, see, this is very subtle.
If you want to achieve it,
you have to be subtle. So now give up all
these gross things. Otherwise this won't
work out. I was also of your type.
Then, you know, if he wants to accept,
he will accept. But there are so many
ways, you know, we can go on,
you see, beating out his gross things
and we can sort of taking out all that.
We have so many ways of doing it.
But still, best thing is that we should
wholeheartedly ask for it.
And once we ask for it wholeheartedly,
it works out. It works out beautifully.
All right? Any questions?
Can I have some water?
You must have a child now.
You must have a baby. You have.
Then in that you must have had some
problem. Oh yes, a lot. That's it.
I mean, it comes to that.
If you do not have a baby,
is it all right? If you have a baby,
then also is there possibilities of that.
So your interest is there.
That's all. Why don't you take treatment,
all? Come, let's go.